# 2 Income Statements & Profitability Measures

Created: 2020-09-06 01:29:59 +0500

Modified: 2021-12-22 21:21:15 +0500

---

**Measuring Income: Accrual versus Cash Accounting**
-   In accrual accounting, you record thansactions when they occur, rather than when cash flows occur.
    -   Revenues are recorded when a product or service is sold, not when the customer pays for that product or service
    -   Expenses are recorded consistently, with the expenses associated with producing the sold product or service shown in the period, even though you may have spent the money in a prior period or will not pay until a future period
-   In cash accounting, you record revenues when you get paid for providing a product or service, and expenses when you pay
-   Unless you are a small or personal business, you will have to follow accrual accounting rules



**Classifying Expenses: Operating, Financing and Capital Expenses**
-   **Operating expenses** are expenses associated with the operations of the business. That includes not only the direct costs of producing the product or service the firm sells, but also other expenses associated with production, including S, G & A expenses
-   **Financing expenses** are expenses associated with the use of non-equity financing. Most often, this takes the form of interest expenses on debt
-   **Capital expenses** are expenses that provide benefits over many years. For a manufactureing company, these can take the form of plant and equipment. For non-manufacturing companies, they can take on les conventional and tangible forms (and accounting has never been good at dealing with these).



![wth Revenæs Operating expenses Written off as depreciation over life of asset Capital Net o et Net Wt o et Net o et Income Statement estimate of the revenue*'sales by any transactims the business the Rriod. au expenæs wth this Far, with benefts into future ßars. of &-siness Ex*nses associated with creating prodiKts or Financial axabk hcorrr axes Net hcome services that t line sales I ncmle to equity investors, prior to taxes axes, based upon taxable income. (May not e to cash taxes paid) I rxm-.e to equity irwestors, after taxes Balance Sheet Fixed Asets CurrentAsets Financing Borrowings on ba lance sheet Shows up as asset on balance sheet Lmg FAIüty ](media/Accounting-for-Finance_2-Income-Statements-&-Profitability-Measures-image1.jpg)



**Revisiting the Income Statement**

![tart with Net out To get Net out To get et out To get Net out To get Item Revenues ost of Goods Sold Gross Profit ther Operating Expenses Operating Profit Financial Expenses Taxable Income axes Net Income Explanation ccountant's estimate of the revenues/sales generated by n transactions made the business durin the eriod. Expenses associated with producing products or services that represent top line sales Production profitability Includes selling, general and administrative and other xpenses associated with operations, but not directly tied to roducin oods and services Profitability of business Expenses associated with creating products or services that represent top line sales Income for equity investors, prior to taxes axes due on taxable income Income for equity investors, after taxes ](media/Accounting-for-Finance_2-Income-Statements-&-Profitability-Measures-image2.jpg)



**Revenue Recognition**
-   For many firms, revenue recongnition is a simple process, where once a product or service is sold, it is recorded as revenues.
-   For some firms, espeicially those that sell products or services over many years, it becomes trickier, since the question of how much of the revenue to recor in the year of the sale and how much in subsequent years becomes debatable.
    -   Under ASC 606: "The new model's core principle for revenue recognition is to "depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services."
    -   Thus, for a real estate developer working on a multi-year construction, revenues should be recognized as contruction progresses, and for a software firm that enters in a contract over many years, performance obligations will determine when revenues get recognized



**Revenue Breakdowns**
-   As companies enter multiple businesses and different geographies, it is useful to know where they generate their revenues.
-   While the breakdown can sometimes by provided in income statements, they are more likely to be part of the footnotes to the financial statements:
    -   Companies generally break down revenues by geography, though the degree of detail can vary
    -   Companies also break down revenues by business segment, though there is an element of subjectivity to the segment categorization



**Operating Expenses: A Break Down**
-   COGS versus other operating expenses: Operating expenses are broadly broken down into expenses directly related to producing the goods or services that give rise to revenues, i.e. cost of goods sold, and expenses that are related to operations, but which are not as directly tied to revenues.
    -   The former are netted out from revenues to get to gross profits
    -   The latter get netted out of gross profits to get to operating income
-   Selling, General and Adminstrative Costs: In many companies, the largest non-operating expense is S, G & A, an amorphous item which can include everything but the proverbial kitchen sink



**Deprecation: Accounting, Tax and Economic Forms**
-   **Economic depreciation** reflects the loss in value (earning power) in an asset, as it ages. It requires nuance, and will vary across even the same type of assets, depending on how it is used.
-   **Accounting depreciation** is more mechanical and is driven largely by the aging of the asset, with the differences often being in whether it happens uniformly over the life of the asset or is more accelerated.
-   **Tax depreciation** reflects what the tax authorities will allow as depreciation for purposes of computing taxable income



**Financial Expenses**
-   The most common financial expense is **interest expense on debt,** either in the form of bank loans or corporate bonds
-   As accountants classify other commitments (such as leases) as debt, **some of the interest expense is implicit,** i.e. it is calculated by accountants based upon their assessment of the debt equivalent value of commitements and current interest rates.
-   In some companies, interest expenses are netted out against interest income earned by the company on its cash holdings and financial investments, and reported as a **net interest expense.** If interest income exceeds interest expense, this number will measure net interest income.



**Income from non-operating investments**
-   Cash & Marketable Securities: Income earned on cash holdings (which is invested in marketable securities, like treasury bills and commercial paper in most companies) will be reported either as a stand alone income or netted against interest expenses.
-   Cross holdings in other companies: The reporting can vary depending upon the magnitude of your holding:
    -   When you hold a (small or minority) portion of another company, the income from that holding will usually be reported in the income statement.
    -   However, if you hold a majority stake of another company, you will generally have to consolidate your financials. That will require you to count 100% of the subsidiary's revenues, operating expenses and operating income as your own.



**Extraordinary Income / Expenses**
-   As the term implies, extraordinary income and expenses are designed to capture what a company does not face in the ordinary course of operations.
-   Extraordinary items include
    -   One-time expense or gain from sale of assets or divisions
    -   Write offs or charges associated with past project, lawsuits or fines
    -   Impairment of goodwill from acquisitions in the past
-   If an item is truly extraordinary, it should show up infrequently and the amount associated with it should vary. If it shows up every year, it is not extraordinary, even if switches signs (goes from profits in some years to losses in others)



**Pro-forma Accounting: Con game or legitimate restatement?**
-   In recent years, companies have become creative in reporting pro-forma financial statements
    -   In some cases, they do so to correct for what they believe are accounting inconsistencies.
    -   In other cases, they are motivated by the desire to increase their profitability.
-   As investors, you should never take pro-forma financials at face value but devise your own smell test on what should be added back and what should not to get to proforma income. In general, there are two items you should focus the most attention to:
    -   The movement of expenses from operating to capital, sometimes merited, sometimes not.
    -   The removal of expenses because they are one time or extraordinary



![Session 2: Post Class tests 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. In accrual accounting, you record transactions as they occur, not when payment is received or made. Assume that you sell a .3-year service contract for $150 million at the start of a fiscal year, and that you get paid half of that amount up front and the other half two years from now. Using accrual accounting principles, how much should you show as revenues this year? a. $ 50 million b. $75 million c. $125 million d. $150 million e. None of the above Accountants draw a distinction between cost of goods sold and other operating expenses in computing gross and operating income. As a manufacturing company, in which of these two groups would you include each of the following expenses? a. Material used to produce products/services b. Labor expenses c. Selling and Marketing Expenses d. G&A costs e. Factory maintenance costs There are usually three measures of income in an income statement: gross profits, operating income and net income. For a company that has a very low cost of goods sold, very high selling and G&A expenses and lots of debt, which of the following would you expect to see in the income statement? a. High gross profits, high operating profits, high net profits b. High gross profits, low operating profits, high net profits c. High gross profits, low operating profits, even lower net profits d. Low gross profits, low operating profits, even lower net profits e. High gross profits, high operating profits, low net profits If your company owns a 5% (minority) stake in another company (subsidiary), where in the income statement would you expect to see the profit effects of this holding? a. In the companys revenues b. In the companys gross profits c. In the companys operating profits d. In the companys net profits e. No where If an item is an extraordinary expense, which of the following should you expect to see for this item in your income statements over time? a. b. c. d. e. The expense will show up every year, albeit with different values The expense will show up most years, sometimes positive, sometimes negative. The expense will show up at regular intervals (every 3 years) The expense will show up infrequently and without regularity None of the above ](media/Accounting-for-Finance_2-Income-Statements-&-Profitability-Measures-image3.jpg)

![1. 2. 3. 4. 6. Session 2: Post class test solutions a. $50 million. Since it is a 3-year contract and the services will be spread over three years, I would record one third of the transaction revenues this year. The payment schedule is irrelevant (at least for income statements) a, b and e are cost of goods sold, and c & d are other operating expenses. Factory maintenance, labor and material are all related directly to products that are sold. Selling and G&A expenses are not. (Factory maintenance may not be a variable cost, but it is still part of cost of goods sold). c. High gross profits, low operating profits, even lower net profits. Low cost of goods sold should translate into high gross profits, but high selling and G&A expenses will make operating profit low, and high interest payments on debt will make net profit even lower. d. In the company's net profits. When you own a 5% stake in another company, the profits from this holding will show up in the income statement below. the operating income line and thus will be part of net income. d. The expense will show up infrequently and be irregular. If an expense shows up every year or at regular intervals, it is part of the company s business operations and should not be considered extraordinary. ](media/Accounting-for-Finance_2-Income-Statements-&-Profitability-Measures-image4.jpg)






