# Skip Lists

Created: 2018-03-24 13:51:51 +0500

Modified: 2018-05-17 22:37:42 +0500

---

In[computer science](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_science), a**skip list**is a[data structure](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_structure)that allows fast searchwithin an[ordered sequence](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ordered_sequence)of elements. Fast search is made possible by maintaining a[linked](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linked_list)hierarchy of subsequences, with each successive subsequence skipping over fewer elements than the previous one (see the picture below on the right). Searching starts in the sparsest subsequence until two consecutive elements have been found, one smaller and one larger than or equal to the element searched for. Via the linked hierarchy, these two elements link to elements of the next sparsest subsequence, where searching is continued until finally we are searching in the full sequence. The elements that are skipped over may be chosen probabilisticallyor deterministically,with the former being more common.
![Skip Lists Sko lists are lir*ed 'Stg that to Sko to the Correct The bottkneck inherent in a sequential scan is avoided. while insertion and deletion remain relatively efficient, Search ig Worst-cage Search time is O(n), tn_lt extremely uNikel» An excellent reference for skip lists is Theory The indexing scheme employed in skip lists is similar in nature to the methcni used to names an TO bokup a name, you index to tab character Of the desired entry. In Figure 3-8. for example. the list represents a simple linked list no tabs. Adcfng tabs (middle figure) facilitates the search. In this Cage, are traversed Once the segment of the list is found. level•O pointers are traversed to fnd the specific entry. Figure 3-8: Skip List Construction The indexing scheme may be extended as shown in the bottom figure. we ncnv have an 'Idem to the TO locate an item, level-2 pointers are traversed until the Correct Segment Of the "st is identified. Subsequently. level-I and level-O pointers are traversed. Our*lg the number Of pointers required for a new node must be determined. This ig easily resolved using a probabilistic technique A rwmber g---atCY is used to togg a computer coin. When inserting a new node. the rnin is tossed to determine fit should be level-I. It you lose. the ig togged again to detemine if Should be level-2 Another 'OSS and the Coin is togged to detemine if the Iuel-3_ This repeats until you "in. If one (level-Ol IS the data Structwe is a Simple with O(n) search time However. if sufficient levels are implemented. the skip list maybe viewed as a tree with the rcnt at the Yüghest level, time is O(lg n) The skip list algorithm has a probabilistic component. and thus a probabilistic bwnds on the time requiwd to However, these quite tÉht in normal For uample, search a list containing 1000 items. the probability that search time will be 5 times the average is about 1 in Implementation in C An fM Skip lists inclL&d_ Typedefg recType, keyType. and Comparison operators compLT and compEQ should be altered to reflect the data stored in the list In addition. MAXLEVEL Should be Set based on the Size Of the dataset ](media/Skip-Lists-image1.png){width="6.135416666666667in" height="7.9375in"}

![To initialize, initList is called. The list header is allocated and initialized. To indicate an empty list. all leveLS are to point to the insert a Searches the correct insertion paint. and inserts it in the list, While searching. the update array maintains pointers to the upw-leve• æntered_ This is to establish links for the inserted node. The newLevel is determined using a random number generator. and the node allæated_ The links established using fm the update array Function delete deletes andfrees a nt:ule, and is implemented in a similar manner. Function find Searches the list for a partzular value. Implementation in Visual Basic Each ncxie in a skip list varies in size depending on a random number generated at time of insertion. Instantiating a class with dynamic size is a bit of a sticky wicket in Visual Basic. Comparison We have seen several ways to dictionaries: hash tables. unbalanced binary search trees. red-black Skip lists. There are Several factcYS that the Choice Of an algorithm: Sorted Output If is then hash tabkS are a alternative. Entries are stored in the table based on their hashed value. no other ordering. For binary trees. the Story ig different An irFOrder walk produce a Scyted list For example: To examine skip list ncnies in order. simply chain the level•O pointers. For example: Node •p = While (p NIL) p P->EÄdt01; Space, The amount of memory required to store a value should minimized. This is especially if mar"' nc&g are to be For hash tables. only one forward pointer per node is required. In addition, the hash table itself m u St be alkJCated For each node hag a left. parent penter_ In additZn, the Of ncxie must be recorded. AJ1hough this requires only one bit. more space may be allcu:ated to ensure that the Size Of ig property Therefore each in a red---Watk tree requires enough space for 34 pointers. For skip lists. each node has a forward pointer. The prcbability ot having a level-I pointer is 1/2. Of having a level-2 is 1/4. In general, the Offorward pointers per ncnie is ](media/Skip-Lists-image2.png){width="6.135416666666667in" height="7.9375in"}

![Time. The algorithm should be efficient. This is especially true if a large dataset is expected. Table 3-2 the særch for each alwithm Note that for hash tables and skip lists is extremely unlikely. Actual timing tests are descried below Simplicity. If algorithm is and easy to understand. mistakes maybe made. This not only makes your life easy, but with the task Of making repairs will appreciate any efforts pu make in this area. The number of statements required for each ig listed in TaNe 3-2 method table tree tree ski list st atementS a time worst-case time Table 3-2: Comparison Of Dictionüies time for '1Sert, Search, and dekte operations on a database Of 65,536 (216) randomly input items may be found in Table 3-3. For this test the hash table size was 10.009 and 16 index levels for the Skip list Although there is game variation in the timings for the fcn_lr metht:uis. they are close enough so that other considerations shm•ld come into play when selecting method hash table insert search delete tree red-black tree ski list Table 3-3: Average Time (us), 65536 Items, Input Table 3-4 Showg the average Search time for Sets Of data a randcm get. where v*ueg are unique. and an ordered set. where values are in ascending order Ordered input creates a vmrst• case Scenario for unbalanced tree algorithms. ag the tree ends up being a linked list. The times are for a single search operation. If we were to search for all items in a database of 65,536 values. a red-black tree take _6 Seconds, while an unbalanced tree algorithm would take I hour. ran do m input ordered input hash tabl e 16 65 536 16 256 4,096 65 536 Table 3-4: unbalanced tree red-black tree Sk list 1 033 55019 Average Search Time (us) ](media/Skip-Lists-image3.png){width="6.135416666666667in" height="7.9375in"}