# Dictionaries

Created: 2018-03-24 13:53:14 +0500

Modified: 2018-03-24 13:53:18 +0500

---

![Dictionaries Hash Tables Hash tables are a Simple and effective method to implement cfctionarieg Average time to Search for an element is 1) while time is O(n). and both contain d&CuSSiong Theory A hash table ig Simply an array that is addressed via a hash For example. in Figure 3-1, hashTab1e is an array with 8 elements, Each element is a pointer to a limkæd list of numeric data. The function fcy this example Simply divides the data key by 8. and the ag an index into the table. This yields a number from O 7, Since the range o' indices for hash Table is O to 7. we are guaranteed that the is valid. Figure A Hash Table To insert a new tem in the table, we hash the key to determine mich list the item goes on. and the at the beginning Of list. Fwexample, to 1 1, divide 1 1 by B giving a remainder of 3, Thus. Il goes on the list staring a' hashTable[31, To find a number. we hash number and Chain list to gee if it is the TO a we find the rwrnber and remove the frcm the inked list Entries in the hash table are dynamicany allocated and entered on a Iin,kæd list associated with each hash entry. This is ag Chainin% An alternative meth:yd, where all entries are stored in the hash table itself. is knt:wn as open addressing and may be found in the references. If the hash function is uniform. or equally distributes the data keys among the hash table Ouiices. hashing effectively the list to be Searched. WcySt-Cage behavicy all keys hash to the same index. Then we simply have a single linked list that must be sequentially Consequently. it is to chcx3Se a hash furwtioru Sewral may be used to hash key values. To illustrate the u2chniques. will assume unsigned char is 8•bits. unsigned Short int is 16-bitg and mtSigned long is 32-bite ](media/Dictionaries-image1.png){width="5.979166666666667in" height="7.739583333333333in"}

![Division method (tablesize • prime). This technique was used in the preceeding example. A haghVaIue, tom O to - 1). is Ccmputed by dividing the key value by the size of the hash table and taking the remainder. For example: typedef int key) key HASH TABLE SIZE; Selecting an appropriate is important to the success ot this metht:xi. For example. a divisible by two yield even hash fcy even keys. and odd hash values for odd keys. This is an undesirable property. as all keys would hash to even values if trwy to be everL If HASH _ TABLE_SIZE is a of then the hash function simply selects a subset of the key bits as the table index. To obtain a more random Scattering, Should be a prime close to a power Multiplication method (tablesize • The multiplication method may be used for a that is a of 2 _ The key is multiplied by a and the necessary bits are extracted to index into the table. Knulh rernmmends using the the gouen ratio, (Sqrt(5) - 11/2. to deten.ne the Aggurne hash table 32 (25) entries and is indexed by an unsigned char (8 bits). First construct a multiplier based on the indu and golden raticx In this example, the is 28 x (Sqrt(5)- IV2. or 158. This Stales the ratio so that the first bit ot the multiplier is "I • Multiply the key by 158 and extract the 5 most s•nificant bits of the least significant word. These bits are by "bbbbb" the regresenta the multiplier and key. The following definitions maybe used for the multiplication method: / • index • / unsigned char se.eie u ISE: / • 1 S---bit • / type def HuhIndexType; se.eie u 40503: / • 32-bie index • / type def static = 2654435769; /• , size of • ](media/Dictionaries-image2.png){width="5.979166666666667in" height="7.739583333333333in"}

![static int S = --- (u • key) s; For example, if is 1024 (210). then a 16-bit index is sufficient and S would be a Of 16- 10 = 6. we have: typedef HuhInduType key) se.eie u 40503; static int S = (u • key) s; Variable addition method (tablesize 2561 TO hash a each character is added. mcnluto 256, to a A hashVaIue. range O•2S5. is computed. char •ser) while ( •ser) h Variable string exclusive-or method (tablesize • 256). This is similar to the addition but sim.lar mrds anagrame TO Obtain a hash value In the range O•2S5. all bytes in the string are exclusive•or'd together. in the process of d&ng each exeuSive-Or. a random *ltrcxduced while ( •ser) h = md8[h A Rand8 is a table Of 256 8-bit unique The exact Ordering is not Criteal_ The exclusive«r metht:u.i has its basis in cryptography. and is quite effective ](media/Dictionaries-image3.png){width="5.979166666666667in" height="7.739583333333333in"}

![Variable string exclusive-or method (tablesize 65536), If We hash the String we may deriæ a value for an arbitwy table Size up to 65538 The Second time the String is hashed. one is added to the first character. Then the two 8•bit hash values are concatenated together to form a 16---bit hash int huh Chu hi , h2 ; ( •ser O) O; h2 = + while ('ser) h2 th2 • h is in O. .6SS3S h = ( (I-migned int) hi 8) | h HASH TABLE srze int) h2 Assuming n data items, the hash table size should be large enough to accommc•date a number Of entries AS Seen Table 3-1. a Small table Size Substantially the average time to find a key, A hash table may be viewed as a collection of linked lists, As the table the rwrnber Of lists increases. the average rwdeS each list decreases. If the table size is I. then the table is really a single linked list of length n, ASSÄng a perfect hash a table Size Of 2 hag two ligtg of length 7/2 _ If the table Size is ICO then we have 100 lists of length n/IOO This considerably reduces the length of the list be There ig Choice Of Size. 16 32 64 time 869 432 214 106 54 28 15 Size 1024 2048 8192 Table 3-1: vs. Average search Time (us), 4096 entries ](media/Dictionaries-image4.png){width="5.979166666666667in" height="7.739583333333333in"}
