# Cheatsheet

Created: 2018-05-28 22:13:46 +0500

Modified: 2018-05-28 22:14:15 +0500

---

![Algebra Cheat Sheet Basic Properties & Facts Arithmetic Operations ab + ac = a (b + c) -1 a b c a---b a bc ad + bc bd b a b c a b c d ab ac b ad --- bc bd ad bc 1 a an Properties of Inequalities If a < b thena+c < b+C an If a < b and c > 0 then ac If a < b and c < 0 then ac Properties of Absolute Val a ---a al 20 abl = lallbl ifa20 if a < 0 ---al = a b ab + ac =b+C, a a Exponent Properties anam 1 a a a a a b 1 a a b b a Ion a Properties of Radicals a + bl lal + lbl Triangle Ir Distance Formula If and points the distance between X2 --- Xl)2 + (Y2 Complex Numbers (a ---bi) = a 2 +192 ](media/Cheatsheet-image1.png){width="6.375in" height="8.25in"}![Logarithms and Log Properties Definition y = logbX is equivalent to x = Example logs 125=3 because 53 -125 Special Logarithms natural log In x = loge x log x = logio x common log "-2 Solve 2x -6x-10=o Logarithnl Properties logb b = 1 logb 1 = 0 b log„x logb = x logb x r = r logb x logb (xy) = logb x + logb y x logb --- = logb x---logb y The domain of logh x is x > where e-2.718281828... Factoring Formulas Factoring and Solving x x x 2-a2 ( = X+a) x---a (x-a)2 2 ---2ax+a = 3 x3 ---3ax +3a x 33 ( x 2-ax+a2) 2) = x n ---an x n + a If n is odd then, --- x---a 2 Quadratic Formula Solve ax +bx+c=0, a Two real u If b2 -4ac=O - Repeated - Two compl Square Root Property If x2 = p then x = ±NFp Absolute Value Equations) If b is a positive number Ipl<b Ipl > b Completing the Square (4) Factor the left side 2 3) 29 ](media/Cheatsheet-image2.png){width="6.375in" height="8.25in"}![Functions and Graphs Constant Function y = a or f (x) = a Graph is a horizontal line passing through the point (0, a) . Line/Linear Function y=mx+b or f (x) = mx+b Graph is a line with point (O,b) and slope m. Slope Slope of the line containing the two points (XI,YI) and (X2,Y2) is Y2 _ rise ---Xl run Slope --- intercept form The equation of the line with slope m and y-intercept (0, b) is Y = mx + b Point --- Slope form The equation of the line with slope m and passing through the point (XI,Y'I) is Parabola/Quadratic Function The graph is a parabola that opens up if a > 0 or down if a < 0 and has a vertex at (h,k). Parabola/Quadratic Function Parabola/Quadratic Funct x = ay2 + by + c g (y) = ay The graph is a parabola that if a > 0 or left if a and b b at g Circle 2 Graph is a circle with radius Ellipse 2 a Graph is an ellipse with cent with vertices a units right/le center and vertices b units u: the center. Hyperbola 2 a Graph is a hyperbola that op right, has a center at (h,k) , units left/right of center and that pass through center witl Hyperbola 2 a ](media/Cheatsheet-image3.png){width="6.375in" height="8.25in"}![Error 2 --- and 5 a 1 ---3 3 + bx ---a(x --- 1) ---ax --- a 2 x-i-a) +a 2 and (2X+2)2 2 Common Algebraic Errors Reason/Correct/Justificatio Division by zero is undefined! _ 32 = _9 , (---3) 2 = 9 Watch p; 222 6 1 1 2 1+1 1 1 A more complex version of thc error. a +bx a bx bx a a Beware of incorrect canceling! ---a (x--- 1) = ---ax + a Make _suyg _ypy d_istribute the = x +61) 2 See previous error. More general versions of previ errors. (2x+ 2) 2 = 4x2 + 8x +4 Squarg first then distribute! See the previous example. Yo factor out a constant if there is the parenthesis! Now see !he_previous error. a b ab c a a 1 a I c b ac b ](media/Cheatsheet-image4.png){width="6.375in" height="8.25in"}




